# !!ATTENTION!!

If you've forked my version of _Plerd_ be aware of these changes:

- The last release to CPAN by the original author was in December of 2019.

    It doesn't look like the original author has done much with this
    distribution in a long time, nor does it look lie he has any interest
    in enhancing it. Pull requests and issues do not seem to be addressed,
    so I'm guessing he is content with the current version. The current
    master branch is not what is released on CPAN - master appears to be
    more of a development branch.  All of the above is not to say the
    package doesn't work, **it does and works well!** The build however may
    be busted. So...

- The build has changed.

    The old build apparently used travis-ci and may not even be working
    correctly at this point.  This version uses my own [home grown
    tools](https://github.com/rlauer6/make-cpan-dist) to build a CPAN
    distribution so if you want to build your own CPAN distribution using
    my forked version, then you'll need to install a few extra packages.

    - [CPAN::Maker](https://metacpan.org/pod/CPAN%3A%3AMaker)
    - [Pod::Markdown](https://metacpan.org/pod/Pod%3A%3AMarkdown)
    - ...and possibly others

    To build a CPAN distribution:

        make cpan

    Once you have the distribution built, you can ignore my home grown
    tools and just untar the tarball and make that your new version to
    hack on if you wish.  The `Makefile.PL` that my tools produce should
    be sufficient to keep you building.

- I've refactored some modules to conform to Perl Best Practices.

    Seems I have a hard time dealing with all of the _flycheck_ issues
    nagging at me when I open these modules in my `emacs`
    editor. I've also made some changes to simplify the code which
    necessitated fixing some issues in the unit tests introduced by those
    changes. My changes have not altered the way the package works in any
    significant ways.

- You can now add a new attribute (`image_style`) to your blog.

    For example:

        image_style: width: 33%; height: 33%

    I found it annoying that you couldn't easily change the image size, so
    I added that feature. This attribute is added to your image just as
    you specify it. The result would look somelike this:

    &lt;img style="width: 20%; height: 20%;" src="http://blog.tbcdevelopmentgroup.com/img/bigfoot.png">

- The markdown engine has been changed to [Text::Markdown::Discount](https://metacpan.org/pod/Text%3A%3AMarkdown%3A%3ADiscount).

    The old version used [Text::MultiMarkdown](https://metacpan.org/pod/Text%3A%3AMultiMarkdown) a pure Perl version of a
    markdown to HTML conversion utility. It suffered from a major
    deficiency (IMHO) - the inability to render fenced code
    blocks. Whatever other extra things `Text::MultiMarkdown` did that
    `Text::Markdown::Discount` doesn't do are no longer supported in this
    version.  So far I have not run into any limitations.  In fact, it's
    faster and more reliable.

- The remainder of this README is from the original version...

# Plerd 

Plerd is meant to be an ultralight blogging platform for Markdown fans
that plays well with (but does not require) Dropbox.

It allows you to compose and maintain blog posts as easily as adding
and modifying Markdown files in a single folder. Plerd creates an
entirely static website based on the content of this one folder,
automatically updating the site whenever this content changes.

Optional and experimental Plerd features add support for IndieWeb
technologies, such as sending webmentions.

## Purpose

Plerd allows a blogger to publish new posts to their blog simply by
adding Markdown files to a designated blog-source directory. By mixing
in Dropbox, this directory can live on their local machine. They can
also update posts by updating said files, and unpublish posts by
deleting or moving files from that same folder.

The generated website comprises a single directory containing only
static files. These include one "permalink" HTML page for every post,
a recent-posts front page, a single archive page (in the manner of
[Daring Fireball](http://daringfireball.net/archive)), and syndication
documents in Atom and [JSON Feed](http://jsonfeed.org) formats. All
these are constructed from simple, customizable templates.

That's it! That's all Plerd does.

If you have the time and inclination, you may watch [a 20-minute
presentation about my reasons for creating
Plerd](http://fogknife.com/2015-06-09-my-yapcna-2015-talk-about-blogging.html).

## Project status

Plerd is released and stable. It still has plenty of room for
improvement, and I welcome community feedback and patch proposals, but
it will continue to do what it does now, in more or less the same
fashion, for the foreseeable future.

I reserve the right to add new features to it, but I will do my best
not to break existing functionality when doing so. If you'd like to
stay informed of Plerd changes, consider joining [the plerd-announce
mailing list](http://lists.jmac.org/listinfo/plerd-announce).

## Setup

### Installation

**First, make sure you have the `cpanm` program on your machine.** It
is likely available as "cpanminus" in your favorite package
manager. (Or install it from source, through the instructions at
[http://cpanmin.us](http://cpanmin.us).)

Then, run this command:

    cpanm Plerd

If you run into issues due to failing dependencies, you can try one of these instead:

    cpanm --notest Plerd
    # or
    cpanm --force Plerd

Alternately, you can run these commands under \`sudo\` to install Sweat at the system level.

If everything installed as it should, then you should have the `plerdall` and `plerdwatcher` programs in your command path.

**To install Plerd from source**, set the current working directory to the same directory containing this README file, make sure you have `cpanm` as described above, and then do this:

    cpanm --installdeps .
    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make install
    

### Configuration

1. Run `plerdall --init` to create a new directory called `plerd/` in
your current working directory, populated with all the special files
and directories that Plerd requires. This includes a sample config
file in `plerd/plerd.conf`.

    If you'd like the directory named something else or located somewhere
    else, you can provide it as an argument, e.g. `plerdall
    \--init=/some/other/location`. See the `plerdall` man page for full
    details.

    Here's the purpose of the subdirectories that `plerdall --init`
    creates:

    - `source`: This will hold your blog's Markdown-based source files.
    - `templates`: Holds your blog's templates. `plerdall --init` will
    place a full complement of sample templates in this directory for you.
    - `docroot`: Will hold your blog's actual docroot, ready for serving up
    by the webserver software of your choice.
    - `conf`: Holds your blog's configuration files. `plerdall --init`
    will place an example `plerd.conf` file in this directory for you.
    - `db`: Will contain metadata about your blog's posts.
    - `run`: Holds PID files and such.
    - `log`: The `plerdwatcher` program will write logs here.

    You can freely add other files or directories in this directory if you
    wish (a `drafts` folder, perhaps?). Plerd will happily ignore them.

2. Edit the `plerd.conf` file in the directory that you created in the
previous step to best suit your needs. The file itself is extensively
commented and self-documenting.

    You can optionally move or copy the file to `.plerd` in your home
    directory. If you do, that new copy of the file becomes the default
    configuration file that Plerd's command-line programs will refer to.

3. As noted above, the `templates` directory that you created in the
first step of this process contains sample templates that you can
customize as much as you'd like. They are rendered using [Template
Toolkit](http://www.template-toolkit.org). You can't change these
template files' names, but you can add new sub-template files that the
main temlates will invoke via [the \[% INCLUDE %\]
directive](http://www.template-toolkit.org/docs/manual/Directives.html#section_INCLUDE),
and so on.
4. Configure the webserver of your choice such that it treats the
`docroot` subdirectory (which you created as part of the first step)
as your new blog's own docroot.

    When running in its basic mode, Plerd does not provide a webserver; it
    simply generates static HTML & XML files, ready for some other process
    to serve up.

## Usage

### Running Plerd

Plerd includes two command-line programs:

- **plerdall** creates a new website in Plerd's docroot directory, based
on the contents of its source and templates directories. (It also
provides a few other "one-off" utility functions, including the
`--init` feature referred to above.)

    Run this program (with no arguments) to initially populate your blog's
    docroot, and at any other time you wish to manually regenerate your
    blog's served files.

- **plerdwatcher** runs a daemon that monitors the Dropbox-synced source
directory for changes, republishing files as necessary.

    **_This is where the magic happens._** While both _plerdwatcher_ and
    Dropbox's own daemon process run on your webserver's machine, any
    changes you make to your blog's source directory will instantly update
    your blog's published static files as appropriate.

    Launch plerdwatcher through this command:

        plerdwatcher start

    It also accepts the verbs `stop`, `restart`, and `status`, as well
    as [all the command-line options listed in the App::Daemon
    documentation](https://metacpan.org/pod/App::Daemon#Command-Line-Options).

### Composing posts

To start writing a new blog post, just create a new Markdown file
somewhere _outside of your blog's source directory_. (Recall that any
change to the source directory instantly republishes the blog,
something you won't want to do with a half-written entry on top.) You
can name this file whatever you like, so long as the filename ends in
either `.markdown` or `.md`.

You must also give your post a title, sometime before you're ready to
publish it. You define the title simply by having the first line of
your entry say `title: [whatever]`, followed by two newlines,
followed in turn by the body of your post.

For example, a valid, ready-to-publish source file could be called
`today.markdown`, and it could contain this, in full:

    title: My day today
    
    I had a pretty good day today. 
    
    I hung out at [the coffee shop](http://empireteaandcoffee.com). Then I went home.
    
    Well, that's all for now. Bye bye.

### Publishing posts

To publish a post, simply move it to Plerd's source directory. (Take
care not to overwrite an older post's source file that may have the
same name.)

Plerd will, once it notices the new file, give the file a timestamp
recording the date and time of its publication. This timestamp will
appear in its own line, after the title line.

Normally, Plerd will set the publication time to the moment that you
added the file to the source directory. Plerd recognizes two
exceptions to this rule:

- If you manually give your post a `time:` timestamp, and it's in W3C
date-time format, then Plerd will leave that timestamp alone.
- If you leave the timestamp out, _and_ include in your post's filename
a date of yesterday or earlier
(e.g. `1994-06-10-i-like-ace-of-base.md`), then Plerd will set the
post's timestamp to midnight (in the local time zone) of that
date. This allows you to batch-backdate many posts at once -- useful,
perhaps, for populating a new blog with existing writing.

(Note that Plerd assumes you use a text editor smart enough to see
that the source file has both moved and had additional lines added to
it from an external process, and to react to this in a graceful
fashion.)

Once it has prepared the source file, Plerd will update the blog. It
will create a new HTML file for the new entry, and add a link to it
from the `archive.html` page. It will also appear in the recent-posts
sidebar of every other entry, as well as the Atom and JSON Feed
documents (unless you decided to manually backdate the entry by
specifying your own date attribute within the file).

### Updating or deleting posts

To update a blog post, just edit its source Markdown file, right in
the source directory. Any changes you make will immediately update
your published blog as appropriate

To unpublish a blog post, simply move it out of the synced source directory -- or just delete it.

## Using Plerd with Dropbox

Plerd loves Dropbox! (Indeed it had Dropbox affinity in mind from the
beginning of its design.)

To have Plerd work with Dropbox, just place its working directory (the
one containing the source, docroot, and template subdirectories)
somewhere in your synced Dropbox folder, and specify the local path to
this folder (from your webserver's point of view) in your Plerd config
file.

Now, you can create, update, and delete blog posts just by moving and
editing files, _no matter what computer you're using_, so long as it
has access to that Dropbox folder.

In this way you could, for example, compose and edit blog posts via
Markdown in your favorite text editor while sitting by the fire with
your laptop in the back of your favorite coffee shop, publishing
updates to your blog by hitting _File → Save_ in your text
editor, and not directly interacting with your webserver (or, indeed,
with the Plerd software itself) in any way.

## Advanced use

### Customizing templates

For a brief guide to the template files and how to customize them for
your blog, please [see the Plerd wiki on
GitHub](https://github.com/jmacdotorg/plerd/wiki/Plerd-template-guide).

### Tags

If you define a list of comma-separated tags under a post attribute
named `tags`, then Plerd will add the post to those linked from a
file named `tags/[tag].html`, relative to the blog's docroot. It will
also link to that page form `tags/index.html`.

For example, this attribute would assign three tags to its post:

    tags: Media, Books I like, 📚

The default Plerd templates will display links to tag-pages where
appropriate. Tag pages get their shape from the template named
`tags.tt`.

_Mind your capitalization with tags!_ If faced with inconsistent
capitalization within a single tag, e.g. one post claims "boston" for
a tag and other one claims "Boston", then Plerd will prefer the first
tag containing capital letters to one that contains none, and it will
retroactively apply to across all relevant posts.

### User-defined attributes

You can add any attributes you'd like to your posts, and then refer to
them from your templates via a hash named `attributes` attached to
every post object. For example, if a post's metadata looks like this:

    title: Example of user-defined attributes
    byline: Sam Handwich

Then you can refer to `post.attributes.byline` to fetch that value
from within the `post.tt` template file, even though "byline" is not
an attribute that Plerd otherwise recognizes. (If a template refers to
an attribute key that a post's source file does not define, it will
simply return a blank value.)

### Social-media metatags

By defining some extra attributes in both your blog's configuration
file, you can direct Plerd to add [Open Graph](http://ogp.me) and
[Twitter Card](https://dev.twitter.com/cards/overview)-enabling
metadata tags to each of your posts. This will allow services like
Facebook, Twitter, and Slack to present attractive little summaries of
your blogposts when displaying links to them.

These blog configuration options (all optional) are:

- **twitter\_id**: If present, then Plerd will try to attach Twitter Card
metadata to each post, associated with the given Twitter username. (No
leading '@', please. Yes, I know. It confuses the YAML
parser. Sorry...)
- **image**: If present, Plerd will use this URL as the location of a
default image to use in the metadata for any post that doesn't define
its own _image_ attribute.

    If _not_ present, Plerd will _not_ generate any social-media
    metadata for any post lacking an _image_ attribute.

- **image\_alt**: A textual description of the image referenced by the
`image` attribute. (Equivalent in usage to the "alt" attribute in an
HTML `<img>` tag.) Plerd will just leave this blank, if you
don't define it yourself.

To see examples of all the above, please see the file
`conf/plerd_example.conf`.

Once you've configured your blog as described above, you can add these
attributes to any post:

- **description**: A very brief summary of this post.

    If not defined, then Plerd will try to use the first paragraph of your
    post's text (after stripping out any markup) as the post's
    description.

- **image**: The URL of an image to associate with this post within
social-media links. (This could refer to image that also appears in
your post by way of an HTML `<img>` tag, but it doesn't have
to.)

    If not defined, then Plerd will instead use the blog's _image_
    configuration directive. If _that_ is also undefined, then Plerd will
    not generate any social-media metadata for this post.

- **image\_alt**: A textual description of the image referenced by the
`image` attribute. (Equivalent in usage to the "alt" attribute in an
HTML `<img>` tag.) Plerd will just leave this blank, if you
don't define it yourself.

### MultiMarkdown

Plerd supports
[MultiMarkdown](https://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/) syntax out
of the box! Go ahead and put MultiMarkdown tables and stuff into your
posts. it'll just work.

### Webmention

Plerd supports [Webmention](https://jmac.org/webmention/), an open
technology that allows websites to send simple "Hey, this page of mine
contains a link to that page of yours!" messages to other websites. If
the linking page employs [Microformats2](http://microformats.io)
metadata, then the target page can choose to display salient
information about the mention, such as its author, or a summary of its
content. It can adjust the format of this display depending upon the
mention's apparent type -- a "like", a repost, a comment-style
response, and so on.

Thus, with certain options enabled, Plerd can send webmentions to
websites that your blog posts link to. Consult the documentation of
the `plerdwatcher` and `plerdall` programs for details about
Webmention-related options.

## A note about encoding

Plerd assumes that all your source and template files are encoded as
UTF-8.

## Support

To report bugs or file pull requests, visit [Plerd's GitHub
repository](https://github.com/jmacdotorg/plerd).

To keep up to date on Plerd news, or to discuss the software with
other users or developers, please join [one of the project's mailing
lists](http://fogknife.com/2018-09-16-plerd-has-some-mailing-lists.html).

You may also simply simply [email me, Jason
McIntosh](mailto:jmac@jmac.org), directly. I am always interested to
hear about other folks making use of Plerd, and I will do whatever I
can to help them with it. All such feedback does tend to make the
software that much better, after all!

[Plerd has a homepage at its creator's website.](http://jmac.org/plerd)

## See Plerd at work

This software powers Jason McIntosh's blog,
[Fogknife](http://fogknife.com), for which it was written.

## Credits

Plerd is by Jason McIntosh (jmac@jmac.org). I would love to hear any
thoughts about Plerd you would care to share, and welcome any
questions or suggestions about it.

Contributors include:

- Petter Hassberg
- Joe Johnston
- Christian Sánchez
- David Turner
- Rebecca Turner

This repository contains the image "Envelope" designed by Jon Testa,
and the image "RSS" designed by
[useiconic.com](https://thenounproject.com/useiconic.com). Both are
shared through a [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 United
States](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/) license, and
come to this project via [The Noun
Project](https://thenounproject.com).
